_episodes/06-project.md, before:

---
title: "Managing a Mini-Project"
slug: project-novice-managing-a-mini-project
teaching: 0
exercises: 20
questions:
- "How do we put everything we've learnt together?"
objectives:
- "Go through the steps of managing a small software project."
keypoints:
- "Problems with code and documentation can be tracked as issues."
- "Issues can be managed on a project board."
- "Issues can be fixed using the feature-branch workflow."
- "Stable versions of the code can be published as releases."
---

Now we've seen all the steps involved in developing sustainable code, let's put that knowledge into practise.

Earlier, we made a fork of the `project-novice-demo` repository. The code there is pretty bad - it's written in a very unsustainable way that makes future development harder (and passing the project on to another researcher even harder!). However, as a published project owned by somebody else, we don't have the permissions required to edit it and fix the problems.

Fortunately, we have already forked it, and now we're going to set up a small project to improve it.
We'll use the tools we've introduced in this lesson so far. Forks don't have **Issues** by default, but you can enable them by going to  the **Settings** tab, then scrolling down to **Features**:

![Selecting the settings tab](fig/06-project/project-settings-tab.png)
![Enabling issues](fig/06-project/project-settings-issues.png)

Now we can start looking for problems with the project and recording them as issues. One immediate one is that there's no `develop`/`dev` branch - all the work has been done on the `master`/`main` branch:

![No dev branch](fig/06-project/issue-dev.png)

{: .challenge}
> ## Identifying issues
> We've found one problem, but there's *plenty* more here. Take a look at your fork of the `project-novice-demo` repository, identify two more things wrong with the code, and raise them, along with the lack of a `dev` branch, as issues. Don't try to run the code - there's more than enough things wrong with it that you can spot just from a quick read-through.
> Once you've got your issues, create a new project board, link it to the repo, and place the issues on it.
>
>{: .solution}
> > ## Solution
> > There's too many things wrong to provide an exhaustive list, but here's a few you may have spotted:
> > * No stable releases
> > * Unclear commit messages
> > * `LICENSE.md` is empty
> > * `README.md` has an inaccurate list of files
> > * `README.md` contains broken links
> > * `What questions do we want to answer with this data?` is unfinished
> > * Multiple versions of the same file in the repository
> > * Poorly-named functions (e.g. `add_column5`)
> > * Poorly-named variables (e.g. `df47`)
> > * Poorly-documented functions *(e.g. `plot_bar_charts`)
> > * Undocumented functions (e.g. `produce_count`)
> >
> > We'll go to the **Issues** tab of our `project-novice-demo`, repository,
> > select **New Issue**, then create an issue. We can even link our issue directly to our project board from here:
> > ![Creating and linking an issue](fig/06-project/miniproject-issue-link.png)

Now we'll work on addressing the issues we've raised. If we want to use the feature-branch workflow, the lack of a `dev` branch is the first one we need to fix! So we'll address that first. We go back to our project via the **Projects** tab, and move the issue to the **In progress** column of our kanban board to let our collaborators know we're fixing it:

![Moving to in progress column](fig/06-project/miniproject-issue-board.png)

Now we'll clone our repository to our machine:

{: .bash}
~~~ 
git clone git@github.com:smangham/project-novice-demo.git
~~~

{: .output}
~~~
Cloning into 'project-novice-demo'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 28, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (28/28), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (17/17), done.
remote: Total 28 (delta 13), reused 20 (delta 10), pack-reused 0
Receiving objects: 100% (28/28), 8.32 KiB | 8.32 MiB/s, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (13/13), done.
~~~

Then create a new branch called `dev` and push it to our remote repository:

{: .bash}
~~~ 
git branch dev
git switch dev
~~~

{: .output}
~~~
Switched to a new branch 'dev'
~~~

{: .bash}
~~~ 
git push -u origin dev
~~~

{: .output}
~~~
Total 0 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
remote: 
remote: Create a pull request for 'dev' on GitHub by visiting:
remote:      https://github.com/smangham/project-novice-demo/pull/new/dev
remote: 
To github.com:smangham/project-novice-demo.git
 * [new branch]      dev -> dev
branch 'dev' set up to track 'origin/dev'.
~~~

With our work finished, we can close our issue and move it to the 'Done' column: 

![Moving to done column](fig/06-project/miniproject-issue-done.png)


{: .callout}
> ## GitHub Web Interface
> We suggest fixing this issue by cloning the repository, to run through an example of linking up git and GitHub, but it can also be done via the web interface on GitHub.
>
> If you open the list of branches (where we saw there was no `dev` branch), we can click **View all branches**:
> ![List of branches on GitHub](fig/06-project/issue-dev.png)
> On this page, we can click **New branch** on the right side to create a new branch:
> ![New branch on GitHub](fig/06-project/branch-dev-new.png)
> Then in the pop-up we can name the branch `dev` and create it:
> ![New branch details](fig/06-project/branch-dev-detail.png)


{: .challenge}
> ## Solving problems
> Now we've got a `dev` branch and a project board with a To Do column with issues in, we can set about fixing one of them.
> 
> We want to use the feature-branch workflow, so it would be easy to collaborate with other people. Pick one of your open issues, and fix it using the feature-branch workflow, then once it's done issue a release of your updated `master` branch!
>
> If you don't have any issues that can be fixed with the feature-branch workflow (e.g. *'Unclear commit messages'*) then add a new issue that the code has a broken link in the `README.md` file and work on fixing that. Small fixes can even be done directly on GitHub!
>
>{: .solution}
> > ## Solution
> > We can address the broken links like this:
> > * Move our issue from **Todo** to **In Progress**
> > * Go to our `README.md` file on GitHub, and switch to the `dev` branch version of it
> >![Switch to the `dev` branch](fig/06-project/fix-dev.png)
> > * Edit the file on GitHub to put in the correct URL (google it!)
> > ![Edit directly on GitHub](fig/06-project/fix-edit.png)
> > * Submit your changes as a new branch, and create a pull request
> > ![Submit as a new branch](fig/06-project/fix-branch.png)
> > * Merge the pull request from our new branch to `dev`.
> > * Close our issue on GitHub
> > * Create a pull request from `dev` to `master`
> > * When `master` is up to date, issue a release on GitHub
> > Normally, we wouldn't just merge a branch into `dev` then `dev` straight into `master`- we'd merge several fixes or new features into `dev`, then merge to `master` and make a release. 

Now you should have a good idea of the skills and techniques required to manage a project successfully!

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from @ Southampton-RSG-Training/project-novice@e029caf99d9d0571b38f04cab8ace7f00a29b883 🚀

_episodes/06-project.md, after:

---
title: "Managing a Mini-Project"
slug: project-novice-managing-a-mini-project
teaching: 0
exercises: 20
questions:
- "How do we put everything we've learnt together?"
objectives:
- "Go through the steps of managing a small software project."
keypoints:
- "Problems with code and documentation can be tracked as issues."
- "Issues can be managed on a project board."
- "Issues can be fixed using the feature-branch workflow."
- "Stable versions of the code can be published as releases."
---

Now we've seen all the steps involved in developing sustainable code, let's put that knowledge into practise.

Earlier, we made a fork of the `project-novice-demo` repository. The code there is pretty bad - it's written in a very unsustainable way that makes future development harder (and passing the project on to another researcher even harder!). However, as a published project owned by somebody else, we don't have the permissions required to edit it and fix the problems.

Fortunately, we have already forked it, and now we're going to set up a small project to improve it.
We'll use the tools we've introduced in this lesson so far. Forks don't have **Issues** by default, but you can enable them by going to  the **Settings** tab, then scrolling down to **Features**:

![Selecting the settings tab](fig/06-project/project-settings-tab.png)
![Enabling issues](fig/06-project/project-settings-issues.png)

Now we can start looking for problems with the project and recording them as issues. One immediate one is that there's no `develop`/`dev` branch - all the work has been done on the `master`/`main` branch:

![No dev branch](fig/06-project/issue-dev.png)

{: .challenge}
> ## Exercise: Identifying issues
> We've found one problem, but there's *plenty* more here. Take a look at your fork of the `project-novice-demo` repository, identify two more things wrong with the code, and raise them, along with the lack of a `dev` branch, as issues. Don't try to run the code - there's more than enough things wrong with it that you can spot just from a quick read-through.
> Once you've got your issues, create a new project board, link it to the repo, and place the issues on it.
>
>{: .solution}
> > ## Solution
> > There's too many things wrong to provide an exhaustive list, but here's a few you may have spotted:
> > * No stable releases
> > * Unclear commit messages
> > * `LICENSE.md` is empty
> > * `README.md` has an inaccurate list of files
> > * `README.md` contains broken links
> > * `What questions do we want to answer with this data?` is unfinished
> > * Multiple versions of the same file in the repository
> > * Poorly-named functions (e.g. `add_column5`)
> > * Poorly-named variables (e.g. `df47`)
> > * Poorly-documented functions *(e.g. `plot_bar_charts`)
> > * Undocumented functions (e.g. `produce_count`)
> >
> > We'll go to the **Issues** tab of our `project-novice-demo`, repository,
> > select **New Issue**, then create an issue. We can even link our issue directly to our project board from here:
> > ![Creating and linking an issue](fig/06-project/miniproject-issue-link.png)

Now we'll work on addressing the issues we've raised. If we want to use the feature-branch workflow, the lack of a `dev` branch is the first one we need to fix! So we'll address that first. We go back to our project via the **Projects** tab, and move the issue to the **In progress** column of our kanban board to let our collaborators know we're fixing it:

![Moving to in progress column](fig/06-project/miniproject-issue-board.png)

Now we'll clone our repository to our machine:

{: .bash}
~~~ 
git clone git@github.com:smangham/project-novice-demo.git
~~~

{: .output}
~~~
Cloning into 'project-novice-demo'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 28, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (28/28), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (17/17), done.
remote: Total 28 (delta 13), reused 20 (delta 10), pack-reused 0
Receiving objects: 100% (28/28), 8.32 KiB | 8.32 MiB/s, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (13/13), done.
~~~

Then create a new branch called `dev` and push it to our remote repository:

{: .bash}
~~~ 
git branch dev
git switch dev
~~~

{: .output}
~~~
Switched to a new branch 'dev'
~~~

{: .bash}
~~~ 
git push -u origin dev
~~~

{: .output}
~~~
Total 0 (delta 0), reused 0 (delta 0), pack-reused 0
remote: 
remote: Create a pull request for 'dev' on GitHub by visiting:
remote:      https://github.com/smangham/project-novice-demo/pull/new/dev
remote: 
To github.com:smangham/project-novice-demo.git
 * [new branch]      dev -> dev
branch 'dev' set up to track 'origin/dev'.
~~~

With our work finished, we can close our issue and move it to the 'Done' column: 

![Moving to done column](fig/06-project/miniproject-issue-done.png)


{: .callout}
> ## GitHub Web Interface
> We suggest fixing this issue by cloning the repository, to run through an example of linking up git and GitHub, but it can also be done via the web interface on GitHub.
>
> If you open the list of branches (where we saw there was no `dev` branch), we can click **View all branches**:
> ![List of branches on GitHub](fig/06-project/issue-dev.png)
> On this page, we can click **New branch** on the right side to create a new branch:
> ![New branch on GitHub](fig/06-project/branch-dev-new.png)
> Then in the pop-up we can name the branch `dev` and create it:
> ![New branch details](fig/06-project/branch-dev-detail.png)

{: .challenge}
> ## Exercise: Solving Problems
> Now we've got a `dev` branch and a project board with a **Todo** column with issues in, we can set about fixing one of them.
> 
> We want to use the feature-branch workflow, so it would be easy to collaborate with other people. Pick one of your open issues, and fix it using the feature-branch workflow, then once it's done issue a release of your updated `master` branch!
>
> If you don't have any issues that can be fixed with the feature-branch workflow (e.g. *'Unclear commit messages'*) then add a new issue that the code has a broken link in the `README.md` file and work on fixing that. Small fixes can even be done directly on GitHub!
>
> **Note:** On GitHub, if you create a Pull Request on the **Pull Requests** tab of a fork, it goes back to the repository you forked *from* by default. Double-check when you're making a **Pull Request** that it's going to *your* fork repository, not `Southampton-RSG-Training`!
> ![Pull request target](fig/06-project/miniproject-fork-pull.png)
>
>{: .solution}
> > ## Solution
> > We can address the broken links like this:
> > * Move our issue from **Todo** to **In Progress**
> > * Go to our `README.md` file on GitHub, and switch to the `dev` branch version of it
> > ![Switch to the `dev` branch](fig/06-project/fix-dev.png)
> > * Edit the file on GitHub to put in the correct URL (google it!)
> > ![Edit directly on GitHub](fig/06-project/fix-edit.png)
> > * Submit your changes as a new branch, and create a pull request
> > ![Submit as a new branch](fig/06-project/fix-branch.png)
> > * Merge the pull request from our new branch to `dev`.
> > * Close our issue on GitHub
> > * Create a pull request from `dev` to `master`
> > * When `master` is up to date, issue a release on GitHub.
> >
> > Normally, we wouldn't just merge a branch into `dev` then `dev` straight into `master`- we'd merge several fixes or new features into `dev`, then merge to `master` and make a release. 

Now you should have a good idea of the skills and techniques required to manage a project successfully!
